Biomonitoring and Community Science on the Sunshine Coast

The Sunshine Coast in British Columbia is an 180 km stretch of rugged maritime landscape along the mainland's southwest coast, nestled between Howe Sound and Desolation Sound. This region includes or overlaps with the unceded territories of the Sḵwx̱wú7mesh, shíshálh, Tla'amin, Klahoose, and Homalco First Nations.  

The region supports rich biodiversity anchored by Coastal Western Hemlock and Coastal Douglas fir forests, (more) old growth stands, wetlands, estuaries, and marine waters. Terrestrial habitats host black bears, cougars, elk, wolves, coyotes, black tailed deer, bald eagles, marbled murrelets, and many other species. Coastal and marine ecosystems include kelp forests, rare glass sponge reefs, salmon streams, and tide pools that are home to molluscs, sea anemones, and fish. Resident and Bigg's orcas, seals, sea lions, and migratory birds rely on these productive waters and shorelines. 

Paired with its extraordinary biodiversity, the Sunshine Coast has an unusual number of formal and informal non-profit organizations whose primary purpose is to conserve, enhance, and steward biodiversity. (more) These organizations are often involved in biomonitoring programs and in education about biodiversity on the coast. 

The primary purpose of this document is to introduce those non-profit organizations that offer opportunities for community members to become involved in biomonitoring as volunteers or to take advantage of the educational opportunities they provide. (more) Here we focus on opportunities within the Sunshine Coast Regional District, extending from Langdale to Egmont. Following the introduction of opportunities for volunteering and education in biodiversity, the next section describes in more detail the sampling regimes used by each organization in their biomonitoring programs and the sites used for their data storage. The aims here are to allow different organizations to learn from one another about current practices across the coast, and perhaps improve them with input from experts in the field, and to provide quick access by researchers and community members to the data collected.

All of the organizations highlighted here are engaged in much more than biomonitoring, community science, and education. Their activities range from beach clean ups to political advocacy for conservation, and building fish ladders to entire biodiversity dedicated facilities. There are many pportunities for community members to be involved in these activities. Go to their websites to see their remarkable and sustained community based work for nature.

Data and Methods

Biomonitoring programs typically deposit data collected as part of the program in a data repository. (more). A data repository acts as a secure, curated and organized hub where researchers, or those otherwise engaged in biomonitoring, can store, manage, and share massive collections of data. Its primary goal is to ensure that valuable information isn’t lost, but is kept "FAIR" (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable) so it can be consulted by interested parties and accessed by future researchers. By providing a structured and citable home for information, data repositories transform isolated data sets into a permanent, searchable resource for long-term and collaborative research and monitoring. 

For each organization, there is a “Data Repository” button that gives links to the sites where data is stored and curated for each of their biomonitoring programs. There is also a “BioMonitoring Methods” button where the data collection methods can be found.


Data

BlueAct Society
- Forage fish: Data is collected as part of a regional monitoring network and shared with Fisheries and Oceans Canada.
- Herring: Data is submitted to Fisheries and Oceans Canada.
- European Green Crabs: Data is reported to the BC Ministry of Water, Land and Resource Stewardship as part of the provincial Green Crab response program.

Hotel Lake Advisory Association
- Water quality monitoring: Data is collected in collaboration with the BC Ministry of Environment and Climate Change Strategy and UBC. Contact the Association at hotellakesave@gmail.com for information about data access.
- Biodiversity monitoring (fish, birds, aquatic invertebrates, mammals): Maintained by the Association. Contact hotellakesave@gmail.com for data access.

Loon Foundation
- Forage fish, seagrass, invasive species, pinnipeds, salmonid escapement, juvenile escapement, larval crabs, coastal water nearshore birds, loons: Data from these programs are typically shared with government agencies and NGOs. Contact the Foundation at info@loonfoundation.org for more information.
- BioBlitz (annual): Data is recorded on iNaturalist. https://www.inaturalist.org/places/sunshine-coast

Pender Harbour Wildlife Society
- Pender Harbour Annual Christmas Bird Count: Data is submitted to Birds Canada. https://www.birdscanada.org/bird-data/christmas-bird-count/

Sargeant Bay Society
- Colvin Creek spawning counts: Data is shared with Fisheries and Oceans Canada. Contact the Society at (604) 885-4642 for more information.

Sunshine Coast Bear Alliance
- This organization does not have current biomonitoring programs and therefore has no data repository.

Sunshine Coast Conservation Association
- This organization does not have current biomonitoring programs and therefore has no data repository.

Sunshine Coast Friends of Forage Fish
- Forage fish monitoring (Gibsons and Davis Bay beaches): Data is collected as part of a regional monitoring network. Contact the group at info@friendsofforagefish.com for information about data access.

Sunshine Coast Natural History Society
- Sunshine Coast Annual Christmas Bird Count: Data is submitted to Birds Canada. https://www.birdscanada.org/bird-data/christmas-bird-count/

Sunshine Coast Salmonid Enhancement Society
- This organization does not have current biomonitoring programs and therefore has no data repository.

Sunshine Coast Streamkeepers Society
- Creek water and air temperatures, spawning counts: Data is shared with relevant government agencies. Contact the Society at scstreamkeepers@gmail.com for more information.

Sunshine Coast Wildlife Project
- Wildlife monitoring programs (goshawks, turtles, snakes, amphibians, bats, owls): Data is typically shared with university research collaborators and government agencies. Contact the Project for information about data access. https://www.coastwildlife.ca/


Volunteer and Education Opportunities: Organizations

BlueAct Society
“BlueAct Society is on a mission to inspire, educate, and foster behavioural change for a thriving coastal life. Through our well-structured conservation projects, we’ve made a tangible impact.” “Our conservation work is placed-based, centred around Gibsons Harbour, Átl’ḵa7tsem/Howe Sound, and the Salish Sea. We work with and bring together partners to support stewardship projects that help sustain healthy coastal life. Our goal is to inspire and educate the community to engage in pro-environmental behavior.” (Quotes from the Society webpage). The Tide Pools Aquarium (https://www.tidepoolsaquarium.org/) is part of this organization. 

Biomonitoring: Yes, there are several biomonitoring and community science programs.
- Forage fish
- Herring
- European Green Crabs

Education: Yes. Occasional educational gatherings and a summer camp for children typically occur in any given year. See the website as well as the Tide Pools site for upcoming events.

Biomonitoring and Community Science Volunteer Opportunities: Yes. Contact the Society to determine current opportunities.

In addition to the monitoring programs, the Foundation is engaged in several other activities aimed at enhancing biodiversity and its appreciation on the coast, and there are volunteer opportunities in these other programs.

Website: https://www.blueact.org/ 

Location: Gibsons

Contact: conservation@blueact.org


Hotel Lake Advisory Association

Biomonitoring: Yes. Records activities of fish, birds, aquatic invertebrates and mammals on the lake. Completes extensive water quality monitoring in conjunction with the Ministry of Environment and UBC. 

Education: No. However, their website is in large part devoted to education about Hotel Lake and related topics.

Biomonitoring and Community Science Volunteer Opportunities: Yes. Contact the association to learn about opportunities.

Website: https://www.hotellakeadvisory.com

Location: Garden Bay

Contact: hotellakesave@gmail.com


Loon Foundation

"The Loon Foundation was founded in 2002 as the Ruby Lake Lagoon Nature Reserve Society", and since that time, "our scope has expanded well beyond the Ruby Lake Lagoon, and in 2020 we changed our name to The Loon Foundation to better represent our wide reaching efforts to conserve biodiversity and foster environmental stewardship." In addition to community science and education, and in collaboration with the shíshálh Nation, this organization is leading the build of the Pender Harbour Ocean Discovery Station. (Quotes from the Foundation’s website.) 

Biomonitoring: Yes, there are several biomonitoring and community science programs.
- Forage fish
- Seagrass
- Invasive species
- Pinnipeds
- Salmonid escapement
- Juvenile escapement
- Larval crabs
- Coastal water nearshore birds
- Loons

Data from these programs are typically shared with government agencies and NGOs.

The Foundation also organizes an annual BioBlitz, and findings are recorded on iNaturalist.

Education: Yes. Occasional educational gatherings and a summer camp for children typically occur in any given year. See the website for upcoming events.

Biomonitoring and Community Science Volunteer Opportunities: Yes. Contact the Society to determine current opportunities.

In addition to the monitoring programs, the Foundation is engaged in several other activities aimed at enhancing biodiversity and its appreciation on the coast, and there are volunteer opportunities in these other programs.

Website: https://www.loonfoundation.org/
Location: Madeira Park
Contact: info@loonfoundation.org

Pender Harbour Wildlife Society

"Founded in 1979, the Pender Harbour and District Wildlife Society has sought to reverse the damage caused by human habitation and improve the life of flora and fauna across the length of the Sunshine Coast. With projects that promote the wellbeing of wildlife, remove invasive plants, and reach out to the community, we believe in improving our environment for all of its inhabitants." (Quoted from the Society’s website.)

Biomonitoring: The Society organizes the Pender Harbour Annual Christmas Bird Count, one of two Christmas bird counts in the Sunshine Coast Regional District, the other centred on Roberts Creek.

Education: Yes. Occasional educational gatherings, including guest speakers, occur in any given year. See the website for upcoming events.

Biomonitoring and Community Science Volunteer Opportunities: No current programs.

The Society is engaged in several activities aimed at enhancing biodiversity and its appreciation in the Pender Harbour area, and there are volunteer opportunities in these other programs. Contact the Society to determine current opportunities.

Website: https://penderharbourwildlife.com/
Location: Madeira Park
Contact: See website

Sargeant Bay Society

"Established in 1978, the Sargeant Bay Society is a volunteer non profit organization located on the Sunshine Coast of British Columbia, Canada. We work to support, enhance, and protect the ecologically sensitive habitats found within Sargeant Bay, its watershed, and neighbouring wetlands."  (Quoted from the Society’s website.)

Biomonitoring: Yes.
- Colvin Creek spawning counts by Sargeant Bay's Streamkeeper.

Education: Yes. Occasional educational gatherings and nature walks occur in any given year. See the website for upcoming events.

Biomonitoring and Community Science Volunteer Opportunities: Yes. Contact the Society to determine current opportunities.

In addition to monitoring Colvin Creek salmon, the Society is engaged in several other activities aimed at enhancing biodiversity and its appreciation at Sargeant Bay and nearby watersheds, and there are volunteer opportunities in these other programs.

Website: https://sargbay.ca/
Location: Largely centred around Halfmoon Bay
Contact: (604) 885 4642

Sunshine Coast Bear Alliance

Our mission “Is to end negative human-bear encounters on our Sunshine Coast by fostering a pragmatic understanding and appreciation of our coast’s bears that will promote a safe and respectful coexistence between our bears, residents and visitors to the community.” (Quoted from the Alliance website) 

Biomonitoring: No

Education:  Yes; visitor centre information brochures, community presentations and appearances at local farmers markets, and other efforts.

Biomonitoring and Community Science Volunteer Opportunities: No

Website:  https://www.scbearalliance.com/
Location: Sechelt
Contact: scbearalliance@gmail.com


Sunshine Coast Conservation Association

"The Sunshine Coast Conservation Association is a charitable non profit with a 25 year legacy of protecting forests, restoring watersheds, and defending the wild places that make the south coast of British Columbia extraordinary. Our work spans the Sunshine Coast Natural Resource District — 2 million hectares of coastal temperate rainforest and marine ecosystems in the territories of the Sḵwx̱wú7mesh, shíshálh, Tla'amin, Klahoose, and Homalco First Nations. Home to over 60,000 residents from Howe Sound to Homathko." This organization is heavily involved in advocating for the conservation of biodiversity on the Coast. The organization has also led biodiversity related research and inventories. (Quoted from the Association’s website.) 

Biomonitoring: No current programs.

Education: Yes. Educational gatherings occur regularly in any given year. See the website for upcoming events.

Biomonitoring and Community Science Volunteer Opportunities: No current programs.

Website: https://thescca.ca/
Location: Sechelt
Contact: info@thescca.ca

Sunshine Coast Friends of Forage Fish

"Our group collects spawning data on the beaches of the Sunshine Coast, British Columbia. By sifting small beach sediment samples, we hope to find forage fish eggs, a sure sign of a positive spawning beach. Our team of dedicated volunteers are sampling every two to four weeks, depending on season, to establish whether or not our beaches are valuable spawning habitats for smelt or sand lance. We are currently sampling a beach in Gibsons and one in Davis Bay." (Quoted from the groups website).

Biomonitoring: The group organizes bi-monthly forage fish monitoring in Gibsons and Davis Bay. 

Education: Yes. The group often holds educational sessions about forage fish at community events. Contact info@friendsofforagefish.com for upcoming events.

Biomonitoring and Community Science Volunteer Opportunities: Yes, volunteers are engaged in the sampling conducted by this group. For opportunities, contact info@friendsofforagefish.com

Website: https://friendsofforagefish.com/
Location: Sechelt
Contact: diannesanford@gmail.com

Sunshine Coast Natural History Society

"Although originally set up to manage Sechelt Marsh, the Sunshine Coast Natural History Society now caters for a wide range of natural history interests on the Sunshine Coast of BC." There is a focus on birds; however, interests span natural history, including bats, dragonflies, and butterflies. (Quote from the Society’s website.) 

Biomonitoring: The Society organizes the Sunshine Coast Annual Christmas Bird Count, one of two Christmas bird counts in the Sunshine Coast Regional District, the other centred on Pender Harbour.

Education: Yes. Meetings include discussion of recent natural history sightings. Other educational events include nature walks and regular invited speakers. See the website for upcoming events.

Biomonitoring and Community Science Volunteer Opportunities: No current programs.

Website: https://sites.google.com/view/sunshinecoastnhs/home
Location: Sechelt
Contact: webmaster.scnhs@gmail.com

Sunshine Coast Salmonid Enhancement Society

"The Sunshine Coast Salmonid Enhancement Society is a charitable organization dedicated to sustaining and building salmon stocks in local waterways and facilitating public education regarding salmonid habitat and life cycles. In 1992 the SCSES, with the help of the local community, raised $150,000 to purchase the hatchery. Since that time we have been operating this facility as a community based enhancement hatchery. We work with four species of Pacific salmon to help with the natural production of Chapman Creek." (Quoted from the Society’s website.)

Biomonitoring: No current programs.

Education: Yes. The Society offers a summer camp for children, focusing on salmon and local natural history.

Biomonitoring and Community Science Volunteer Opportunities: No. However, there are opportunities to be involved with hatchery work, including fin clipping, fish transfers, fish releases, spawning, incubation work, fish feeding, and related tasks.

Website: https://scsalmon.org/
Location: Sechelt
Contact: admin@scsalmon.org

Sunshine Coast Streamkeepers Society

"Sunshine Coast Streamkeepers Society is a group of people from different communities along the Sunshine Coast. Our goal is to have each creek monitored and to advocate for wild salmon!" (Quoted from the Society’s website.)

Biomonitoring: Yes.
- Recording creek water and air temperatures
- Spawning counts

Data from this program is shared with relevant agencies.

Education: No current programs.

Biomonitoring and Community Science Volunteer Opportunities: Yes. Contact the Society to determine current opportunities.

In addition to monitoring streams, the Society is engaged in several other activities aimed at enhancing stream biodiversity and its appreciation, and there are volunteer opportunities in these programs.

Website: https://sunshinecoaststreamkeepers.com/
Location: Largely centred around Gibsons and Roberts Creek
Contact: scstreamkeepers@gmail.com

Sunshine Coast Wildlife Project

"We are a small group of biologists working to conserve the Sunshine Coast's precious natural heritage for generations to come. Since 2006, we have been working with community partners to help conserve wildlife and their habitats." Goals of the project include provision of scientific information to guide conservation and aid in the recovery of species at risk, to restore and enhance wildlife habitat and increase the area of land conserved for wildlife, and to facilitate community participation in stewardship efforts. (Quote from the Project's website)

Biomonitoring: The Project is involved in a variety of biomonitoring projects, including those centred on goshawks, turtles, snakes, amphibians, bats and owls. These programs are often in collaboration with university researchers.  

Education: Yes. The Project provides workshops, seminars and youth programs centred on biodiversity and conservation. Contact the Project for upcoming events.

Biomonitoring and Community Science Volunteer Opportunities: Yes, several of their programs engage volunteers. Contact the Project to determine current opportunities.

Website: https://www.coastwildlife.ca/
Location: Sechelt
Contact: see website

Additional Opportunities

There are also broader, regional and national platforms where community members can contribute to biomonitoring and community science:

- BC Nature (https://www.bcinat.com/): A provincial umbrella organization for naturalist clubs; members can participate in surveys, field trips, and species at risk monitoring across the Sunshine Coast.

- eBird – Sunshine Coast (https://ebird.org/region/CA-BC-SC): A global bird observation platform that allows users to submit bird sightings specific to the Sunshine Coast region, contributing to long term population and distribution data.

- iNaturalist – Sunshine Coast (https://www.inaturalist.org/places/sunshine-coast): A community science platform where users can upload photos of plants, animals, and fungi observed on the Sunshine Coast; observations help document local biodiversity and are often used by researchers and conservation groups.

- Birds Canada (https://www.birdscanada.org/you-can-help/citizen-science): Birds Canada offers diverse volunteer community science opportunities. These range from monitoring nest success and counting birds in winter to surveying nocturnal species and mapping breeding populations.